Britain’s Labour Party
英国工党

Backwards, comrades!
后退吧，同志们！

Jeremy Corbyn is leading Britain’s left into a political timewarp. Some old ideological battles must be re-fought
杰雷米•科尔宾带领英国左派重操旧业，是时候重回意识形态战场了！
Sep 19th 2015 | From the print edition

BEFORE he had finished belting out his first celebratory rendition of “The Red Flag”, a hymn to class struggle, some of Jeremy Corbyn’s colleagues in Labour’s shadow cabinet had already handed in their resignations. A 66-year-old socialist, Mr Corbyn has spent 32 years as one of the hardest of hardline left-wingers in the House of Commons and a serial rebel on the Labour backbenches. On September 12th he flattened three moderate rivals (see article) to become leader of Britain’s main opposition party. Labour MPs are stunned—and perhaps none more so than Mr Corbyn himself.

杰雷米•科尔宾还没来得及唱完《红旗》（一首阶级斗争赞歌）来庆祝自己当选党魁，数名工党影子内阁的议员就已经递交了辞呈。科尔宾现年66岁，是一名社会主义者，此前32年间，科尔宾一直是下议院最强硬的老左派之一，也是工党后座议员中的“长期反对派”。9月12日，科尔宾击败了三名温和派候选人，成为英国主要反对党工党的领袖。这让工党议员无不震惊，科尔宾本人或许也不曾料到。（注：“serial rebel”是很多外媒的报道中常见一个描述科尔宾的短语，如'Serial Rebel' Jeremy Corbyn Expected To Win Labour Party Leadership）


Two views are emerging of Labour’s new leader. The more sympathetic is that, whatever you think of his ideology, Mr Corbyn will at least enrich Britain by injecting fresh ideas into a stale debate. Voters who previously felt uninspired by the say-anything, spin-everything candidates who dominate modern politics have been energised by Mr Corbyn’s willingness to speak his mind and condemn the sterile compromises of the centre left. The other is that Mr Corbyn does not matter because he is unelectable and he cannot last. His significance will be to usher in a second successive Conservative government in the election of 2020—and perhaps a third in 2025.

科尔宾当选工党领袖后，人们对此有两种观点。其一抱赞同态度，这种观点认为，不论你对科尔宾的意识形态作何感想，他的存在至少给只会念叨陈词滥调的议会辩论注入了新思想，从而给英国带来新的思想活力。此前，现代政治领域的候选人大都“无所不谈，但全是夸夸其谈”，选民早就提不起兴趣了；相比之下，科尔宾愿意直言不讳，谴责中左派那些老掉牙的折衷做法，选民们不禁振奋了。而另一种观点认为科尔宾无足轻重，反正他也不可能在下届英国大选中胜出，工党党魁也干不了太久，他的作用不过是为保守党在2020年大选中二度连任埋下铺垫，没准还能让其在2025年三度连任呢。

Both these views are complacent and wrong. Mr Corbyn’s election is bad for the Labour Party and bad for Britain, too.

以上两种观点并不正确，而且自作聪明。科尔宾的当选，不仅对工党不利，还会给整个英国带来不良影响。

Cowards flinch and traitors sneer
懦夫退缩，叛徒讥笑

Start with the ideas. In recent decades the left has had the better of the social arguments—on gay rights, say, or the role of women and the status of the church—but the right has won most of the economic ones. Just as the Tory party has become more socially liberal, so, under Neil Kinnock and then Tony Blair, Labour dropped its old commitment to public ownership and accepted that markets had a role in providing public services. Mr Blair’s government put monetary policy in the hands of an independent Bank of England and embraced the free movement of people and goods within Europe.

首先来看看科尔宾所谓的“新观点”。近几十年，左派在社会议题上总是占得上风，比如同性恋权利、女性地位、教会特权等议题，但经济议题上往往是右派获得胜利。保守党在社会问题上逐渐向自由主义靠拢，尼尔•金诺克和托尼•布莱尔领导下的工党也不再执着于公有制，转而承认市场在提供公共服务方面也有一定作用。布莱尔政府还把管理货币政策的权限交给英格兰银行这一独立机构，并认可人员和商品在欧洲范围内的自由流动。

The argument today has moved on—to the growing inequality that is a side-effect of new technology and globalisation; to the nature of employment, pensions and benefits in an Uberising labour market of self-employed workers (see article); and to the need for efficient government and welfare systems. Fresh thinking on all this would be welcome—indeed it should be natural territory for the progressive left. But Mr Corbyn is stuck in the past. His “new politics” has nothing to offer but the exhausted, hollow formulas which his predecessors abandoned for the very good reason that they failed.

如今，争论进一步蔓延。技术革新和全球化导致不平等现象愈演愈烈。以“优步”为代表的新型运营模式出现，个体户成为劳动市场的新主力，让人们不得不对雇佣关系、养老金、补助等概念重新界定；政府效率和福利制度等问题，也都是人们争论的热点。面对这些问题，我们欢迎一切新思想。没错，这些都是激进左派的传统战场，但科尔宾的观点完全只是在炒冷饭而已。他所谓的“新政策”并没有什么真知灼见，不过是些工党早就摒弃了的空洞教条。为什么摒弃？因为这类政策全都失败了。

Only in the timewarp of Mr Corbyn’s hard-left fraternity could a programme of renationalisation and enhanced trade-union activism be the solution to inequality. If just spending more money were the secret of world-class public services, Britain, which cut almost 1m public-sector jobs in the previous parliament, would have been a cauldron of discontent. In fact voters’ satisfaction with public services rose. If you could create macroeconomic stability by bringing the Bank of England back under the government’s thumb, then Britain would not have spent the post-war decades lurching from politically engineered booms to post-election busts.

科尔宾等极左份子提倡重新国有化，倡导新公会运动，然而只有在过去某些特定的时间里，这类政策才会有助于解决不平等问题。要是单靠增加支出就能打造世界一流的公共服务，英国早就该民怨沸腾了（经过之前议会的决策，英国可是削减了将近一百万公职人员）。但事实上，英国选民对公共服务的满意度是有所提升的。英国在二战后几十年间，屡屡从政府干预带来的经济繁荣滑向大选过后的经济崩溃。如果将英格兰银行收归国有就能稳定宏观经济的话，这些情况也就不会发生了。

Time and again, Mr Corbyn spots a genuine problem only to respond with a flawed policy. He is right that Britain sorely lacks housing. But rent controls would only exacerbate the shortage. The previous Conservative/Liberal Democrat coalition government should indeed have been less austere. It could have boosted demand by spending more on infrastructure. But Mr Corbyn’s notion of “people’s QE”—getting the Bank of England to print money to pay for projects—threatens to become an incontinent fiscal stimulus by the backdoor (rather than serve as an unorthodox form of monetary policy when interest rates are at zero). There is no denying that young people have been harmed by Tory policies that favour the old. But scrapping university-tuition fees would be regressive and counterproductive. For proof, consider that in England more poor students go to university than when higher education was free, whereas in Scotland, whose devolved government has abolished tuition fees, universities are facing a funding crisis and attract no more poor students than they did.

科尔宾的老毛病是，他指出的问题切中要害，但提出的应对政策可谓糟糕。科尔宾提出，英国住房严重不足，这个观点没有问题。但租金管制只会让情况雪上加霜。之前保守党－自由民主党联合政府施行的紧缩政策确实有些过头，政府本应该加强基础设施建设来刺激消费需求。但科尔宾那个“人民的量化宽松”的点子（让英格兰银行加印英镑为各种项目买单），只会成为一个毫无节制且见不得人的财政刺激政策（这和在利率为零的时候将量化宽松作为非传统货币政策还不一样）。保守党现行的政策偏向于老年人，这确实损害了年轻人的利益。但直接免除大学学费？这不仅是一种倒退，还会适得其反。想要证明的话，看看英格兰，相比高等教育免费的时候，现在更多的贫困生上得起大学；反观苏格兰，在当地政府免除大学学费之后，大学开始出现财政危机，贫困生生源数量也开始下降。


To see where Mr Corbyn’s heart lies, you have only to look at the company he has kept. He admires the late Hugo Chávez for his legacy in Venezuela. No matter that chavismo has wrecked the economy and hollowed out democracy. He indulges Vladimir Putin’s authoritarian kleptocracy in Russia and blames NATO for provoking its invasion of Ukraine. He entertains Hamas, which has repeatedly used violence against Israel and admires Syriza, the radical left party that has governed Greece with almost unmatched incompetence. Yet he is stridently anti-American, anti-Israel and anti-NATO and quietly anti-European Union (apparently, it’s a free-market conspiracy—see article). He even scolded China’s Communist Party for its free-market excesses.

想弄清楚科尔宾的立场观点，只需要看看他与哪些人为伍。他对已故的委内瑞拉总统乌戈•查韦斯倍加推崇，认可查韦斯的政绩（尽管查韦斯主义搞垮了经济，摧毁了民主）；对弗拉基米尔•普京一味迁就（尽管普京在俄罗斯的统治被认为是威权主义的窃盗统治）；谴责北约，认为北约不应该“激怒”俄罗斯（不然俄罗斯可不会入侵乌克兰）；他还款待哈马斯（该组织曾多次进攻以色列），赞扬激进左翼党（这个极左党派在治理希腊期间展现出前无古人的无能）；科尔宾还一再强调自己反美、反以色列、反北约，还有那么点反欧盟（欧盟显然是自由市场的阴谋），他甚至谴责中国共产党（因为他们可是自由市场的忠实信徒）。

To argue that Mr Corbyn’s ideas will improve the quality of political discourse in Britain just because they are different is about as wise as Mr Corbyn’s refusal this week to sing the national anthem at a service to commemorate the Battle of Britain. Policies this flawed will crowd out debate, not enrich it.

仅仅因为科尔宾的思想有别于常人就觉得这将改善英国政坛风气，这种观点简直和科尔宾在不列颠战役纪念仪式上拒唱国歌一样英明。科尔宾漏洞百出的政策不仅不会带来百家争鸣，反而只会抹除异见。

The Corbyn of history
科尔宾，历史的黑乌鸦

Perhaps that doesn’t matter. Mr Corbyn had no expectation of winning the leadership, and for a man who has never had to compromise, the drudgery of party management, media appearances and relentless scrutiny must be a hardship. Even if he is not pushed, he may not choose to stay for long.

不过这也许无关紧要。科尔宾自己本来就没想着竞选成功，对于一个永不妥协的斗士来说，管理党派、媒体亮相、没完没了的审查这些苦差一定是种折磨。即使没有外力推动，科尔宾恐怕也不愿在党魁之位上坐阵太久。

Yet the leader of the opposition is one Tory meltdown away from power. Even if Mr Corbyn fails ever to become prime minister, as is likely, he will still leave his mark on the Labour Party. The populism and discontent that brought him the leadership will not just subside. The loathing of Westminster that he represents and the fantasies that he spins will make the task for the next centrist Labour leader all the harder. There is nothing to celebrate about Mr Corbyn’s elevation. For Britain, it is a grave misfortune.

如果保守党在下届大选中落败，科尔宾就会成为首相，登台执政。不过，即使科尔宾最终没能成为首相（这种情况发生的可能性非常之大），他仍然会给工党留下自己的印记。民粹主义盛行、人民对当局日渐不满，这些都是科尔宾成功获选的推动因素，而这一切，都不会轻易消散。科尔宾对英国议会的极度厌恶还有他鼓吹的那些政治空谈，都不免让下一任中间派工党领袖举步维艰。科尔宾的获选实在没什么好庆祝的。对英国来说，这真的是一场巨大的灾难。

Translated By Ghost_II
Proofread By LucyChen,Janewfj

Word List
1.belt out
to sing a song or play an instrument loudly:
e.g. She was belting out old Broadway favourites.

2.rendition
A rendition of a play, poem, or piece of music is a performance of it
e.g. Scotti’s rendition of the anthem, with a trademark high note at the end, made him beloved in Cleveland. --Washington Times Sep 11, 2015

3.hymn
1) a song of praise to God 圣歌
e.g. Cooper plays the manservant of the slave merchant John Newton, who wrote the famous hymn. --US News Jul 14, 2015
e.g. The famous hymn that President Obama belted out just three weeks ago is headed to the Broadway stage this week. --Washington Post Jul 16, 2015
2) If you describe a film, book, or speech as a hymn to something, you mean that it praises or celebrates that thing [mainly JOURNALISM]
e.g. a hymn to freedom and rebellion
e.g. "It was a hymn to his Maker, the guardian of the country's destiny," says Mr Bhattacharya. –BBC Jul 8, 2015

4.hardline 
If you describe someone's policy or attitude as hardline, you mean that it is strict or extreme, and they refuse to change it.
e.g. Another major base east of Aleppo, Kweiris, is currently besieged by ultra hardline Islamic State militants. –Reuters Sep 9, 2015

5.flatten 
to defeat someone completely and easily in a game, argument etc
e.g. He was totally flattened by her sarcasm. 她说的挖苦话使他无地自容.
e.g. He will not just lose the next general election, in 2020; he will be flattened. --The New Yorker Sep 13, 2015

6.stale
1) [esp of food] smelling or tasting unpleasant, mouldy or dry, because no longer fresh （尤指食物）不新鲜的, 走味的, 带霉味的, 乾瘪的
e.g. stale biscuits, bread, cake, beer 不新鲜的饼乾﹑ 面包﹑ 糕饼﹑ 啤酒
e.g. I awoke with a flash of cold sweat, stale booze taste immediately filling my mouth. --The Verge Sep 13, 2015
2) boring, because it is always the same
e.g. stale news, jokes, ideas 老掉牙的消息﹑笑话﹑ 思想
e.g. Like the Soviet Union, Iran is an uneasy conglomeration of national and cultural groups held together by a radical but increasingly stale ideology. --Wall Street Journal Sep 11, 2015

7.spin
1) to describe a situation or information in a way that is intended to influence the way people think about it - used especially about what politicians or business people do
e.g. Supporters attempted to spin the bill's defeat to their advantage.
e.g. Spin, in other words, doesn’t always trump substance, even if it seems like the easy way out. --MSNBC Sep 14, 2015
e.g. The sport’s greatest closer was overwhelmed by history, no matter much she tried to spin it a different way to reporters. --Washington Times Sep 11, 2015
2) If someone spins a story, they give you an account of something that is untrue or only partly true.
e.g. He was surprised, and annoyed that she had spun a story which was too good to be condemned as a simple lie.

8.sterile
1) completely clean and free from germs 无菌的
e.g. An operating theatre should be completely sterile. 手术室应该完全无菌.
e.g. The skull bone was put in a sterile solution. --The Guardian Sep 5, 2015
2) A person or animal that is sterile is unable to have or produce babies 不育的
e.g. Medical tests showed that he was sterile. 医学检查表明他没有生育能力.
e.g. But after his death, the Harding family disputed Ms. Britton’s account, arguing that he was sterile and could not be Elizabeth Ann’s father. --New York Times Aug 14, 2015
3) A sterile situation is lacking in energy and new ideas, boring
e.g. a sterile debate 毫无结果的辩论.

9.complacent 
calmly satisfied with oneself, one's work, etc 自满的; 自鸣得意的
e.g. We must not be complacent about our achievements; there is still a lot to be done. 我们绝不能满足於自己的成绩, 还有很多事情要做.
e.g. All of this should be a warning to Tories not to be complacent. --Wall Street Journal Sep 13, 2015

10.exhausted
having or containing no more of a particular thing or substance
e.g. an exhausted coal mine
e.g. The silly anti-Japanese narratives of an exhausted propaganda machine point to a much more troubling question. --Wall Street Journal Sep 9, 2015

11.fraternity
1) [U] brotherly feeling; brotherhood 兄弟般的感情; 手足之情
e.g. There is a strong spirit of fraternity among these isolated people. 这些与世隔绝的人之间有强烈的兄弟般的情谊.
e.g. But the order says the true essence of its organisation is faith and fraternity, and that Orangeism's continued existence abroad shows this. –BBC Aug 30, 2015
2) group of people sharing the same profession or common interests or beliefs 有相同的职业﹑ 共同的爱好或信仰的群体; 同好
e.g. the medical, banking, teaching, etc fraternity 医务界﹑ 银行界﹑ 教育界等同人
e.g. the religious fraternity of St Benedict 本笃会的教友.
e.g. Five people as well as the fraternity itself were charged with criminal homicide, involuntary manslaughter, aggravated assault and other charges. –Time Sep 14, 2015
3) [C] (US) group of male students at a university who form a social club 组成社团的大学男生群体.
e.g. He was president of his fraternity, in student government. --The Guardian Sep 14, 2015

12.cauldron
n. 大锅
e.g. A large wooden trunk stood open at the foot of his bed, revealing a cauldron, broomstick, black robes, and assorted spellbooks. --Harry Potter And The Goblet Of Fire
e.g. Israeli society is a cauldron of competing views and they often sit uneasily with one another. –Time Aug 4, 2015

13.under sb’s thumb
completely under sb's influence or control完全受某人的影响或支配
e.g. She's got him under her thumb.她把他管住了.

14.lurch
suddenly move(usually forward) or roll; stagger
e.g. a drunken man lurching along the street 沿街踉跄而行的醉汉.
e.g. Trump’s hardline stance on immigration has prompted his rivals to lurch to the right. –Time Aug 24, 2015

15.bust
1) 半身塑像（只有肩膀往上的那种）
e.g. Assailants previously targeted the bust, putting a tire around its neck and setting it on fire, according to Collins. --US News Sep 21, 2015
2.1) v. to break something
e.g. I dropped my camera on the pavement and bust it. 我把照相机掉在人行道上摔坏了.
"We were stranded over in Turkey for two days because the boat's motor was busted. " –BBC Sep 17, 2015
2.2) a complete falure
e.g. Market booms and busts, like the one we are seeing now in China, are not new, as history tells us. –Time Sep 21, 2015
3) n./v.（指警方）突击搜查（房屋）或拘捕（某人）:
e.g. Mickey's been busted for drugs. 米基曾因毒品事而被捕.
> go bust (of a person or a business) become bankrupt; fail financially （指人或企业）破产.
e.g. And banks and businesses sitting on huge piles of cash don’t go bust, a boon to financial stability. --Wall Street Journal Sep 16, 2015

16.incontinent 
1) unable to control the bladder or bowels in passing waste matter from the body 失禁的
e.g. People often become incontinent when they get very old. 人老了就往往有内急失禁现象.
e.g. "The operation has succeeded in so much as I'm not incontinent any more... but my quality of life has been destroyed." –BBC Jun 30, 2015
2) Not restrained; uncontrolled
e.g. incontinent rage.
e.g. The Tories' aim is to convince voters that Labour are incontinent when it comes to public money - unable to control themselves whatever they may say. –BBC Jan 5, 2015

17.backdoor
You can use backdoor to describe an action or process if you disapprove of it because you think it has been done in a secret, indirect, or dishonest way.
e.g. Then a new government campaign calling for encryption backdoors comes across to most techies and many defense experts as tone deaf. –Slate Aug 27, 2015

18.scrap
v. throw away 抛弃, 抛掉
e.g. scrap a car, ship, bicycle, etc 遗弃报废的汽车﹑ 船﹑ 自行车等
e.g. Most Okinawans, however, want the base to close and its replacement scrapped or built in another part of Japan. --The Guardian Sep 14, 2015

19.kleptocracy
A government characterized by rampant greed and corruption. 窃盗统治

20.crowd out
e.g. Small shops are being crowded out by the big supermarkets. 小商店受到大型超级市场不断排挤.
e.g. In the 1980s American exports crowded out European films. = squeeze out

21.drudgery
You use drudgery to refer to jobs and tasks which are boring or unpleasant but which must be done.
e.g. In his Florida hospital room, Stroman said, he imagined the drudgery of rehabilitation: up early for physical therapy — and then what? --New York Times Sep 7, 2015
e.g. And as their children got older they branched out from routine drudgery to more educational interaction. –Economist May 14, 2015

22.sympathetic 
1) [只表语] ~ (to sth/sb): showing favour or approval 表示好感或赞同
e.g. We asked for her support in the election, but she wasn't sympathetic (to our request). 我们请求她在选举中给予支持, 但她（对我们的请求）无动於衷.
e.g. The pope's announcement sent a clear message that the church is sympathetic to those with flawed marriages, he said. --Los Angeles Times Sep 13, 2015
Notes

1、英国政府相关概念
1.1 议会/国会
议会（Parliament of the United Kingdom）：英国和英国海外领地的最高立法机关。英国是典型的议会民主制的君主立宪制国家，其议会由三部分组成：国王，上议院和下议院。这三个部分相互分立。

上议院（House of Lords）：上议院议员大部分是以指派方式产生，当中包括英国国教会的大主教或主教（即“灵职议员”，Lords Spiritual）以及贵族（即“俗职议员”， Lords Temporal）。自19世纪以来，上议院权势逐渐凌夷，至今已远不如下议院。

下议院（House of Commons）：通过民主选举产生的机构，每一位下院议员都是由一个选区的选民选出，议员当选后，也就在议会代表该选区。

国会议员（Members of Parliament, MP）：尽管上议院是国会的一分子，但“国会议员”一词仅指下议院的议员。

1.2 英国议会辩论
英国议会是立法机关，对法案的审议无一不采用辩论形式。除了立法，大事小事、国际国内地方的事全都可以成为辩论的主题。英国议会的辩论制度还发展成一种世界各地辩论赛中常用的形式——英国议会制辩论（British Parliamentary, 简称BP），实乃爱好辩论、爱好英语、爱好逻辑的小伙伴的必备良品。上下两院的辩论都会录像放在网上，每周还会允许游客进入参观。

议会辩论的直播及往期录像官网：
http://www.parliamentlive.tv/Commons

1.3 政府
英国中央政府（British government）官方名称为Her Majesty’s Government (HMG).

首相（prime minister）：执掌英国行政权力的最高官员、英国政府首脑。在一般情况下，国会下议院的多数党党魁或者执政联盟的领袖自动成为首相人选，人选经由君主确认及任命后正式成为首相。

内阁（Cabinet）：英国政府的最高行政决策机构，由首相和最资深的数位大臣共同组成。在近代历史中，内阁大臣主要是下议院议员。

大臣（minister）：由首相任命，从上议院和下议院中选出。

1.4 其他重要概念
影子内阁（Shadow Cabinet）：在野党为准备上台执政而设的预备内阁班子。由下议院中最大的反对党领袖，物色下院中有影响的同党议员，按内阁形式组建而成。

后座议员（Backbencher）：议会中既非执政党大臣、又非反对党影子内阁成员的广大议员，由于坐在议会后座而得名。后座议员的形象力较小，发言内容通常较为自由。

1.5 Westminster
Westminster（音译：威斯敏斯特）是英国伦敦中心的自治市，位于泰晤士河西岸。该区域内的主要地标性建筑有Palace of Westminster（威斯敏斯特宫）, Buckingham Palace（白金汉宫）, Westminster Abbey（威斯敏斯特修道院，又译“西敏寺”）以及Westminster Cathedral（威斯敏斯特大教堂）。其中，威斯敏斯特宫是英国议会所在地，故又称议会大厦。在政治范畴内，Westminster一词常用来指代英国议会。


2、英国主要政党
保守党（Conservative Party）：官方称保守与统一党（Conservative and Unionist Party），也常被称作托利党（Tory Party）。是英国历史最悠久的政党，也是全国最大的保守主义中间偏右政党。

工党（Labour Party）：是英国一个中间偏左，社会民主主义和民主社会主义的政党。起源于19世纪晚期，二战后迅速崛起。
其他主要政党包括前任政府联合执政党之一的自由民主党（The Liberal Democrats）、今年大选中一跃成为议会第三大党的苏格兰民族党（Scottish National Party）。

3、英国选举相关
3.1 大选
英国大选选的是议员（区别于美国，美国选民选的是总统）。

大选以选区为单位进行，每个选区都有不同政党的候选人参选，得到最多选民投票的就会成为代表该选区的议会议员。

待各个选区的议员诞生后，如果一党拥有绝对多数的议员（以2015年大选为例，下议院650个议席中，须取得至少326个席位），则此党将组成下届政府（即成为执政党），该党党魁则成为首相。如果没有任何党派拥有绝对多数席位，则合计拥有绝对多数席位的两个或多个政党将组成联合政府，基本上其中最大党党魁将成为首相；或者单独一党成立政府，并通过与其他党派非正式的联盟和协议而得以延续。（英国下议院于2011年制定“固定任期议会法”（Fixed-term Parliaments Act 2011），英国大选每5年举行一次，具体日期是5月份的第一个星期四。英国首相会在五年任期后向国王提请解散国会，所以下议院议员的任期不会超过五年。）而在野党的最大党将成为官方反对党（Her Majesty's Most Loyal Opposition, or the Official Opposition）。

3.2 2015年英国大选

2015年英国大选是英国国会下议院第55次大选，在2015年5月7日举行。选举结果：保守党超过下议院半数议席，获得独立组阁资格，卡梅隆连任首相成功（这是23年来保守党首个多数党政府）。呼声很高的工党在本次选举中失利，由于工党在2014年苏格兰独立公投期间反对苏格兰独立，令工党在这个传统票仓失利，党魁艾德•米利班德引咎辞职。上一任联合政府的组成成员自由民主党同样惨遭滑铁卢，仅获得8个议席，仅为上届的1/7，不仅失去了联合执政权，更将国会第三大党的地位拱手相让。

苏格兰民主党成为仅次于保守党和工党的英国下议院第三大势力，该党因去年苏格兰独立公投而声名鹊起。
